# Caching in

Summary: A look back at how disk caching software and disk
de-fragmenters were A Thing back in the 90s.

Back when dinosaurs like me roamed the IT world, we neatly labelled
our 8" floppy disks and dreamed of winning the lottery and being able
to buy a 10MB hard drive. You might notice I said MB there -
MegaBytes - not GigaBytes or Terabytes. Yeah, it was that
long ago. 

Those 8" floppies were huge though. If you took one outside on a windy
day they could double as a hang glider. You'd usually have a little
plastic case with a clear plastic top to store your oversized
floppies, and there'd even be a little silver key on the front of the
case so you could lock your precious work away. Of course that didn't
stop someone lifting the thing up, taking it outside and smashing the
thing open with a hammer, and then running off with all your
candy-making secrets.

And then The Event happened, the IBM was released and the world was
never the same again.

You had 5 and 1/4" inch floppies for a start. And then hard disks
started appearing. 10MB became the norm. When I bought my first PC, an
Amstrad PC1640(for which I took out a bank loan) it had, along with
256 colour VGA graphics, a whopping 32MB hard drive. It also had 640K
of RAM - which was, according to Bill Gates "More than enough for
anyone".

There were two words on everyones lips back then. Well not "everyone"
but everyone I talked to, which was a subset of humanity populated by
100% hardcore geeks. Those words were "disk cache". Oh, the long
conversations we had over caching your drives and how to fine tune the
whole shebang.

For DOS computers using disk caching software was a lot cheaper than
buying a controller with built in hardware cache. You could improve
disk performance by up to around 20 times depending how you set things
up. You'd probably average 10 times the performance improvement. Oh
how many hours I lost sweating over my config.sys and autoexec.bat
setting up disk cache drivers correctly!

But there was yet more fun to be had!

With space and performance at such a premium there was disk
de-fragmentation too. Disk defragmenters were A Thing back then. Over
time as files got deleted from your hard disk, you'd get these "holes"
on your drive and the poor old read head would be jumping around all
over the place when it should be doing nice sequential reads and
writes. 

The other problem of course with fragmentation is that many of those
holes are a lot smaller than you'd like, and no good for pretty much
anything - in fact they were, quite literally, a waste of space! 

Enter these wonderful disk de-fragmenters. They were actually fun to
watch. You'd run the tool and you'd get this colourful display, almost
ASCII art in motion. It was quite fascinating to watch the
de-fragmenter shuffle blocks around on your hard drive. Then, after
what seemed like an interminable time, it would proudly tell you how
much extra (usable) disk space you had. And your disk would be faster
too of course. Magic!

Those were the days. I wonder if anyone thinks about things like disk
caching and disk de-fragmenters these days? Somehow I doubt it, but
I'm not completely sure that's a good thing.

---

* Published: 2017-11-05 07:24:12 UTC
* Updated: 2017-11-05 07:24:12 UTC
* UUID: E718A65A-8C66-4918-8E14-C88394D95D75

