# Pastures new

Summary: Things are changing at Coffee and Code HQ.

So we switched to BST and the world didn't stop turning, and this
website didn't collapse into a wormhole. It's all good. But other
changes are afoot here at Coffee and Code HQ. I recently accepted a
permanent position at Nexmo, joining the [wonderful
team](https://developer.nexmo.com/team) there to work on developer
documentation. Nexmo provide an API for the Vonage global telecomms
network. This arms your web apps, smart phone apps, or even command
line tools with a global reach. You can generate SMSs, make and
receive voice calls, and interact with messaging services like FB
Messenger and Viber, in a few lines of code. There is something
magical about having your little Python app call you up on your mobile
and then speak to you. I have only scratched the surface of the API's
capabilities so far, and I have a lot to learn, but I am really
excited by the potential of this company - I have not been this
excited about software in quite some time!

With regards Nexmo, I am hoping to be able to produce some decent
articles over on the [Nexmo Developer
Blog](https://www.nexmo.com/blog/category/developer/), but we will see
how things pan out - other documentation work is likely to take
precedence.

So where does that leave things at Coffee and Code?

Well, I'm not going anywhere. I will continue to produce articles from
time to time here. Judging by the page views and some of the emails I
have received, there are some of you nutters out there who not only
read this stuff, but actually seem to enjoy it too! But the thing is I
can no more stop writing than I can stop breathing, so you will have
to put up with my nonsense for a while yet.

So how will things pan out over the coming months now that I am
actually "working" for a living? Well, expect some changes. I am
planning on roping in that young buck
[James](https://jabedford.github.io) to sort me out a decent design. I
seem to be incapable of putting together decent CSS. OK I tried. I
hope I produced some CSS that is at least conducive to
readability. But "design" is something this website sorely lacks.

On the content side I am trying to be realistic. I can commit to at
least one piece per month. I would like to write more about using the
Nexmo APIs, but we will have to see.

I will save some of my energy for working on the code behind this site
too. I would like to add features such as tagging, and a structure
generated from directory hierachy, rather than manually edited source
files. Adding an article requires several manual edits which is never
a good thing as it provides a lot more opportunity for me to screw
things up! 

As well as learning the Nexmo technology I have put learning Flask
back on the agenda. I have written just about enough CGI code now to
want to call it a day on that. I am also revisiting the idea of
writing a simple web server in Python too, and already have the
initial code in place - certainly not industrial strength, but a fun
little exercise none the less.

On the non-technical front I am still reading widely - topics range
across philosophy, theology, philosophy of religion, English
Literature and history. I also sketched out the outline of a science
fiction novel that explores three kinds of evil - personal, systemic
and natural. The hero is flung into a world where these evils have
been eliminated, but finds that without these things humanity becomes
something not entirely pleasant, and actually something not entirely,
well, human. It has been very enjoyable creating this imaginary world.

I also continue to write about my travels. I recently spent a month in
Philippines and we had a blast. Adventures included being caught up in
typhoon Basyang, close encounters with yet more volcanoes, and some
breathtaking snorkeling around Camiguin island. It was a journey of
highs and lows. While my travel writing does not appear on this blog
it could do if I feel there's enough interest.

All this partly explains why I am writing this blog post at three in
the morning. I am busy, but I can always sleep more when I'm dead.

---

* Published: 2018-03-31 03:20:12 UTC
* Updated: 2018-03-31 03:20:12 UTC
* UUID: 76DB10D5-4605-441C-A66C-450C47CE0C56


