# On buying my first smartphone

Summary: Some thoughts on taking the plunge and becoming a smartphone
owner.

I blame the snow. It was 5.30am and very cold and dark. I hadn't had
the first coffee of the day and was feeling it. I pitched up at Kemble
railway station to find all the trains had been cancelled. I made my
way over to Swindon in horrible conditions and luckily there was a
train running to London. When I got to London I managed to get
completely lost - I exited Moorgate tube station by the "wrong" exit
and had no idea where I was. The guy I asked for directions whipped
out his smartphone, checked Google maps, and soon had me heading in
the right direction. That night in the hotel the Internet crapped out
while I was in the middle of checking email.

Enough was enough...

I've put off buying a smartphone for a very long time. That's funny
because I actually worked on smartphone software before smartphones
even existed. We were indeed writing software for a type of phone that
did not even exist in research labs. This was late 90s. MS-DOS wasn't
yet extinct back then. The iPhone was still more than ten years away.

There were Nokia dumb phones around but I just didn't want one. Then
one night the MG broke down again and I had to walk about 3 miles to
call the AA, and then walk back again. The AA didn't turn
up. Eventually I got the car going - there was a little float valve in
the carb that had come loose. There I was on the side of the A3, gone
ten at night, with a small lamp and bloodied knuckles.

Enough was enough...

It was 2001 and I bought one of the new-fangled Nokia 3310s. I still
have the same mobile number I got back then. By complete chance it was
a very easy number to remember, so I stuck with it.

For reasons I can't quite remember now I also bought a Nokia 3510i,
which was more or less the same as a 3510 but had a colour display,
some time in 2003. It was a cool little phone and I used it for many years. 

Then in 2007 the iPhone came out. A good friend bought one soon after
and no longer wanted her Nokia 6300. I grabbed it. A nice freebie. I
used that for ten years. Then they brought out the new Nokia 3310 in
2017 and I got a bright yellow one as a present from the same friend.

And then that terrible day with snow and no trains and wandering in
the city with no clue as to where I was, not to mention the bad Internet...

I ended up splashing out on a reconditioned iPhone 7 which appears as
good as new. One of the first apps I put on was Trainline. Then I made
sure I had Maps. Gmail, Slack, Oyster card, Starbucks soon
followed. Notes also has a very useful document scanner, great for
capturing receipts, and I can convert to PDF and save on iCloud, reading for uoploading to the expense system.

I have been really impressed with iMessage too - at least it's a
really nice way to communicate with other people on iPhones for free..

However, I had issues with sending photos to people who don't have
iPhones, so Viber will soon be on there to fix this. It also puts the
Internet in my pocket. I can even tether my Kindle Fire to the iPhone
for access while out and about.

So with all this smartphone goodness why didn't I buy a smartphone
before?

Two reasons: security, cost.

Security is still probably my biggest concern. Your phone knows a lot
about you - including your location, your voice, your contacts. If you
do social media they gather more data on you. You do need to be aware
of how much personal data you are putting out there.

Cost turns out to be less of an issue than I thought. Well I was not
going to fork out £1,100 for an iPhone X. I got a reconditioned iPhone
7 for £399 from GiffGaff. It's 128K and it looks like brand new
although it was classed as "Very Good". There's not so much as a
scratch on it. With a £10 a month Goody Bag from GiffGaff I have
virtually unlimited communications - unlimited SMS, unlimited voice,
and 3GB data. All in all I will probably save more than £10 on my
land-line phone bill - I was still using that to call landlines and
mobiles. Now I just use the iPhone.

All in all I am really pleased to be a smartphone owner - security
issues aside. I should probably have taken the plunge years ago...

---

* Published: 2018-04-xx 04:20:43 UTC
* Updated: 2018-04-xx 04:20:43 UTC
* UUID: 903C8C72-2E79-4705-B56F-8DD3216C8C2B

