# About

Hi, I'm Tony. 

This website holds a few thoughts on various technical topics (as well
as on cats and coffee). I felt like I needed a place to keep various
notes I was accumulating and I decided to share (inflict) my ramblings
on others through this site. Sorry about that!

As you can probably tell from the "retro" (i.e. lurid) colours used on
this site, it is not meant to be taken too seriously! I have enough
serious writing in my day job thanks very much!

You can also read this website directly in [my
GitHub](https://github.com/tbedford). I also store the tools used to
build this site there. I tend to like to know how things work, so I
generally prefer to take the DIY approach to things like websites - so
no fancy Wordpress site here. 

I am also a big believer in "incremental improvement" so expect to see
that in play here.

## Technical interests

My interests mostly centre around databases and operating systems. I
can code in Python and C. I have also worked with Java, Objective-C,
and C++ in the past, and if I go way back, VAX-BASIC, F77 and Z-80
assembly language (all thankfully long since forgotten)! I recently
became much more interested in all aspects of distributed systems and
information retrieval.

I love to code (although I'm **not** one of those coding geniuses),
and recently wrote a couple of versions of my own memory allocator,
that included nifty features such as block splitting and coalescing. I
have also worked on various data munging/web scraping projects in the
past. More details on my [GitHub page](https://github.com/tbedford).

## Current employment

I'm a contract technical writer, specializing in writing docs for
software developers.

As a contract technical writer I've worked for ARM, Fotango, The Open
University, Alfresco Software, and Cambridge Silicon Radio (now
Qualcomm).

## Past employment

In the past I've been a technical writer for companies such as
Criterion Software (now EA), Tao Group, Oracle(MySQL), Sun
Microsystems(MySQL), and Alfresco Software.

I also have extensive experience as a technical trainer. Over the
years I've delivered courses on operating systems and Java technology
at Sony (HQ Tokyo), Motorola (Schaumberg, Chicago and Austin, Texas),
Sun Microsystems (Culver City), NTT DoCoMo (San Jose), Sharp Labs
(Portland), and even Amiga (Snoqualmie). 

I also designed and delivered a course on Embedded C for Nokia
(Camberley, UK), back when Nokia were numero uno.

## Personal

I have a cat! He's probably the most spoiled cat in the world, but all
'parents' probably say that. His name is Timmy. I adopted him some
years ago - he was a rescue:

![Timmy](./images/timmy.png "Timmy")

And here's me posing: ;)

![tony](./images/johnny_starbucks_resized.jpg "Tony")

I am currently based in the UK, but spend as much time as I can in the
Philippines. Here's why:

![hammock](./images/hammock.jpg "Hammock")


## Contact

You can contact me through my [Contact page](./contact.html).
